[Music]
you're listening to air talk on 89.3
KPCC I'm David Lazarus from the LA Times
sitting in for Larry manthal in just a
little bit I'll be joined by my
colleague Mary McNamara who's the TV
critic for the paper we'll be doing a
little Emmy recap for you right now I
want you all to be good doobies and put
on your thinking caps because we're
going to be talking about a new book
called the beginning of infinity
explanations that transformed the world
it's by David Deutsch who's also the
author of the fabric of reality in which
he detailed his Theory of Everything yes
this is a man who covers a lot of ground
David Deutsch thank you very much for
joining us hi David
now it's interesting look at the title
of this book the beginning of infinity
you might think it has some sort of
spatial or chronological meaning but
you're describing more a journey tell us
about that Journey
yes it's it's primarily the beginning of
an Infinity of knowledge and that is to
say that we're only just scratching the
surface of what is possible for uh
thinking beings like ourselves to
understand and there's an intimate link
then between understanding nature and
controlling it so in fact among other
things there is a spatial implication we
are going to spread out across space and
throughout time but the main thing is
that we're going to spread out across
the space of ideas and there is no that
the message of the book is that there's
no fundamental limit to what we can
understand and explain one thing that's
very interesting here is you make a very
sharp distinctionist about saying that
it is not so much that we are pursuing
truth or knowledge but rather that we
are pursuing explanations good
explanations for what's around us what's
the difference
uh the it is the
the only reason that
um one might avoid uh the word truth and
knowledge which I don't is that they
have traditionally been given very
irrational meanings uh knowledge has
been defined as that which you know for
certain and that sort of thing and
that's not available but I I like the
philosopher Karl Popper whom I sort of
follow in these matters if you define
knowledge as just being uh true and
useful information then we certainly can
gain knowledge but an explanation to me
is a statement about reality
and a good explanation is a statement
about reality that accounts for
something and is hard to vary while
still accounting for it and that that I
think is the key difference between
let's say science and pre-scientific
ways of trying to understand the world
such as Faith or myth now I notice how
artfully you just phrase that of the
non-scientific ways and in your book
it's it's much the same you do address
creationism briefly you do address
intelligent design briefly but you don't
really get into the the tension between
faith and Science and yet the
undercurrent of your work seems to be a
very cunning uh broadside against
religion because that would seem to
qualify as what you call in your book a
bad explanation or a bad philosophy bad
only in so far is that it doesn't
provide a a good rational substantial
explanation for things
yes well religion I'm only I'm only
interested in criticizing religion and
such like things as explanations
for example the adaptations in living
things
uh the religion may have other uses such
as
um uh cultural ones which I have no real
objection to and as for Broadside I
think uh that's not quite the right word
because I made a decision just even
before I wrote my first book
um that it's just going to take too much
time to address all the reasons why all
the wrong theories are wrong and I'd
rather make progress because it's making
progress that is really convincing to
people you never really convince people
of anything by proving to them that
their current ideas are wrong they have
to have somewhere to jump to somewhere
which is better by their own lights
than the their existing place and
therefore I want to show what I consider
the true
um situation of the universe and our
place in it and all that kind of thing
is and let people decide for themselves
how they will change from mistaken views
which have held us back we're speaking
with David Deutsch he's the author of
the beginning of infinity explanations
that transformed the world a bit of the
phone lines interesting getting your
questions from Mr Deutsch and also your
comments on well the rightness and
wrongness of the explanations for the
world around us
866-893-5722 or
866-893 KPCC you can join us online at
kpcc.org click through to the air talk
page Mr Deutsch I want to read a little
excerpt from The New York Times review
of your book in which David Albert
writes it hardly seems worth saying to
begin with at the hutzpah of this guy is
almost beyond belief and that any book
with these sorts of Ambitions is
necessarily in some overall sense of
failure or a fraud or a joke or Madness
but Deutsch who is famous among other
reasons for his pioneering contributions
to the field of quantum computation is
so smart and so strange and so creative
and so inexhaustibly curious and not
with and so vividly intellectually alive
that it is a distinct privilege
notwithstanding everything to spend time
in his head and yet that notwithstanding
everything is a key phrase here because
he goes on to shoot down some of the
things you say yes uh so uh David Albert
and I have had many a debate on these
issues
um and I I could almost use the same
words about him he's a great iconoclast
um he's I I'm one of the themes that he
particularly disputes was the um many
universes interpretation of quantum
mechanics of which I'm a proponent and
just for everyone playing at home that
means there's an infinite number of
parallel universes out there and things
are happening all the time that's right
and and with the the there are many in s
of ourselves
our idea is that this follows inexorably
from our deepest Theory of physics
namely quantum theory but only a
minority of physicists believe this but
but then thing about David Albert is
that he is the only physicist I know who
was once a proponent of this and has
then changed his mind but what I don't
understand is you write in the book
about the importance of developing a
good explanation for things and that
when we talk about the Multiverse and
these parallel worlds and whatnot I have
no way of challenging you nor nor do I
have any way of challenging a person of
faith when they say that God created the
world in seven days oh the the the
difference is quite profound the thing
is that the parallel universes
interpretation is really just the
statement that quantum theory is a
description of reality and isn't to be
argued away as some kind of Illusion or
just a way of a description of how we
perceive the world it's not a
description of humans human Minds human
experiences but the equations literally
describe the world and so in that sense
it uh purely a scientific theory and the
objection to it is purely a bit of bad
philosophy it's the same bad philosophy
that says that
um fossils are not evidence of uh
dinosaurs because no one has ever seen
dinosaurs you might as well say that you
couldn't challenge a paleontologist
because neither he he cannot prove that
there ever were dinosaurs and you can't
prove that they weren't the the logic of
the denial that quantum theory is true
is the same as the logic of the denial
that evolution is true either the
psychological motivations may be
different let me hasten to add but the
logic is the same but do we have the
same record of proof that a
paleontologist would be able to offer up
for the theory of evolution moreover
that there were brachiosaurs and whatnot
tromping all over the place at one time
because he can hold a big bones he can
hold up fossils and he can say there in
your face dude yes well we can hold you
see the thing is holding up isn't
dinosaur
parallel universes but in both cases
the dinosaurs and the parallel universes
respectively are the only known
explanations of those
of evidence when I say explanations I
mean accounts of reality
so that's the sense in which I mean that
the logic is the same
866-893-5722 is the number your
questions or comments for David Deutsch
author of the beginning of infinity are
very welcome Don calling from Costa Mesa
welcome to the program
hi good morning
I'm curious what's your
what's your what is the ontological
status of ideas are you talking about
creativity Don
do ideas exist yes I I I it I argue in
the book that all sorts of abstract
entities like uh numbers and
um and indeed uh ideas
um do exist objectively and the argument
for that is that the causal effects of
an idea are independent of the physical
substrate in which they're instantiated
for example
the idea is that I'm telling you now
begin as sort of electrical charges in
neurons in my brain and then get
translated into vibrations in air and
then vibrations in electrical vibrations
in copper wires and so on and the effect
that it has has nothing to do with
copper or air you couldn't deduce them
from any amount of study of copper or
air the thing that is having the causal
effect and will make you now do one
thing rather than the other you know
perhaps buy my book or whatever
um is contained in the information in in
in the knowledge which is an abstraction
it isn't the atoms that are making you
do it it's
in your ear that are having that effect
it's the information that is embodied in
them now back in college we used to get
high and talk like this you're making a
living out of it
whether one is critical the the ideas
are always always come by and are
undirected uh variation of existing
ideas and it could be that that's what
getting high is but but the difference
that what makes the difference between
making progress with it and not making
progress is the criticism afterwards
obviously you're also defining an almost
organic process this generation of ideas
this perpetuation of progress and you
are indeed a very optimistic person in
your book you you do write that problems
are inevitable but you also write that
problems are soluble and yet you focus
on the the European Enlightenment as one
of those signal moments in Mankind's
history where things sort of
kick-started to a whole other level why
did we see that one moment why aren't we
seeing a steady progression of ideas as
opposed to this one sudden flurry of
ideas oh uh Perhaps Perhaps I uh
understated what the enlightenment was I
I think the reason why the enlightenment
is
um
a sort of a one-off idea is that it is
the beginning of infinity it's not that
everything happened at that time in fact
scientific progress is happening much
much faster now than it did at the
height of the of what is called the
enlightenment in the 18th century but
what changed between the 18th century
and the whole of human history before
that apart from a few
um attempted enlightenments that very
tragically failed is that they found a
way of making sustained progress and
that that was of having a tradition of
criticism you in for most of human
history those are two opposing Concepts
tradition is usually about preventing
change and preventing criticism but
magical thing a tradition of criticism
if it can be stabilized and it only has
been stabilized once in history at the
thing we call the enlightenment is the
beginning of an open-ended creation of
knowledge exponentially growing
indefinitely prior to the enlightenment
in the so-called Dark Ages was it a
matter of us not having this criticism
around us or was it a matter of
something holding it back that's
something more than likely the church
uh I think the external manifestations
of repression which hold back the growth
of knowledge are only ever a secondary
effect
um as sort of tidying up effect of
tidying up the few ideas that managed to
get through the primary effect which is
cultural it's that people it's not that
there were all sorts of ideas bristling
uh up like they are today but that they
were then being suppressed
of most part it's that people were not
having ideas they did not think that
problems were soluble they they thought
that the situation of the world as they
saw it was inevitable and unchangeable
and
and route to betterment
and couldn't happen on Earth anyway
so
um that's that's the that's the
difference
866-893-5722 is the number Dave calling
from Costa Mesa welcome to the program
or some civilization thought that uh
eclipses were caused by God but that was
the best information they had so your
theories don't necessarily mean that
they are true because uh obviously
you're working with the information you
have so are you do you agree that that
you may be way
whale new information comes up
and not only do I agree I insist on that
it the whole uh the whole point of the
beginning of infinity in other words
that unlimited Improvement is possible
is that even things that we consider
incontrovertibly true today are
eventually going to be improved upon uh
not all of them I mean we don't know
which ones they are and which ones
aren't but there will be things that we
consider incontrovertible today that
will be uh improved upon tomorrow and uh
in in science we have examples of this
all the time uh cosmology has recently
discovered that the expansion of the
universe is accelerating and only a few
years ago the debate was whether the
universe was going to recollapse or
expand Forever Without accelerating that
it might accelerate was simply not on
the cards so a whole new kind of
explanation was needed and and that
gives us a whole new conception of
cosmology we've only got about one
minute left but based on your thinking
that all problems are soluble even if we
don't see the solution readily does that
mean that we will save the environment
that we will save the planet that we
will harness alternative energies that
will fly to other planets yes it means
that we
can too and if we do it the right way
which is to understand that it has
caused that such things improvements are
caused by the growth of knowledge we
need to maximize that at the expense of
parochial details that might obsess Us
in the moment gosh you make it sound so
easy
very hard and in the Multiverse I assume
there's a conversation just like this
going on in which I am actually showing
my deep fluency in quantum mechanics
right now there is fantastic I knew I
could do that somewhere David Deutsch is
the author of the beginning of infinity
explanations that transform the world
he's author also the author of the
fabric of reality Mr Deutsch thank you
so much for joining us well thank you
and fun and if you have any theories of
your own or explanations about how
things are the way they are please share
them with us online at kpcc.org click on
through to the air talk page we will
segue in just a moment from quantum
mechanics to well television there you
go a natural segue as we're joined by
Mary McNamara of the LA Times to give us
a recap of what happened at the Emmys
I'm David Lazarus in for Larry mantle
this is airtalk on 89.3 KPCC let's head
straight into The Newsroom now and check
in with Hedy Lynn hurdy